Course Title: Pickleball Strategy and Doubles Play
Course Link: https://www.upstatepickleball.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Coach_Mo_Pickleball_Strategy_Guide.pdf
Course Instructor: N/A

PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
Pickleball Strategy Guide
by Coach “Mo”
Compliments of PickleballCoach.com
Here is what Coach “Mo” says are 10 ways to
guarantee that you will LOSE more
Pickleball games than you WIN.
1. FREQUENTLY miss your serve.
2. FREQUENTLY miss your return of serve.
3. HELP your opponents by keeping their OUT balls in
play.
4. When your opponent hits a very difficult FAST
shot at you, try and hit a low percentage sharp
angled shot for a winner rather than a DEFENSIVE
shot.
5. Take away your PARTNER’S easy forehand shots,
with your weaker backhand shots.
6. Get upset with your Excellent Pickleball partner
who has SUCCESSFULLY jumped in front of you to
win the point!
7. Do NOT keep the ball at your opponents feet as
much as possible.
8. Do NOT play up to the No Volley Zone line.
9. Hit the ball TOO FAST for good placement, and do
NOT give yourself enough leeway for error.
10. Take TOO MANY sharp angle shots rather than
high percentage shots down the middle of the court
that bounces between your opponents.






Pickleball Strategies
Grip
Use the continental grip. The point of the "V"
between your thumb and index finger should be
placed on top of the handle of the paddle when the
face of the paddle is perpendicular to the ground.
The easiest grip to use is the Continental Grip (See
"Volley Tips"). This grip is halfway between the
Eastern Forehand Grip and the Eastern Backhand
Grip. A player never has to change his grip on the
paddle. The volley, serving, overhead and ground
strokes are all the same using the Continental Grip.
Most Pickle Ball players only keep one hand on the
paddle when making their shots. A player can have
much greater control hitting the ball if he uses two
hands to steady the paddle before hitting the ball.
If you have a wet grip problem on hot, humid days,
wear a wrist band and buy some tennis over grips for
your paddle handle. Gamma Pro Wrap over grips are
about $1.00 each, shipping included. Check back
pages of tennis magazines for telephone numbers of
suppliers.

Ready Position
Get back to the ready position (See "Volley Tips")
quickly after every ground stroke and especially
volleys with your paddle way out in front of your
body.
A common mistake made while moving forward to
net is not having your paddle in proper ready
position. Many players have their paddles at their
knees or below the net, not up and out in front of the
body.
At the point when the ball contacts your opponents’
paddle, you should be in your ready position: elbows
and paddle out in front of your body, feet at shoulder
width apart, side by side on your toes, not your heals,
ready to move left or right. Never be moving at the
point of contact of your opponent’s paddle on the
ball. No matter where you are on the court, stop and
get into your ready position. Never sacrifice being
ready, for positioning on the court. If you are not
prepared early and properly to hit a ball, it doesn’t 
2
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
matter where you are on court. You probably won’t
hit the ball properly.
Return of Serve
Never try for a pure winner. Do not make an
unforced error. Make your target spot five feet from
the baseline and eight inches to left of center. This
will keep the ball closer to the backhand of the player
whose backhand is toward the middle of the court.
The ball will travel over the low part of the net and
give you a lot of leeway. Hit the ball slow to give you
plenty of time to set up at the no volley zone line.
Change spin occasionally (top or under spin). It will
cause some opponents to make mistakes at times.
Once in a great while, when ahead, hit fast return of
serve for a change up when you feel your opponents
will least expect it.
Place the return down the middle, slightly closer to
the back hand player. Both opponents may think the
other will take the shot.
Wait for the serve 12" or more behind the baseline so
that the ball will bounce in front of you, not at your
feet for a difficult shot. If your opponent has a very
fast and deep serve, you may have to wait about 3
feet behind baseline.
Have a mental note in your mind of players who do
hit soft, short serves. Watch the face of the server’s
paddle and be ready to sprint in and split your feet for
the short return.
If one opponent is weaker than the other, hit the
return to weakest opponent’s backhand until you get
ahead a few points.
When the better of your two opponents least expects
it, hit a shot to him deep to his backhand. The
element of surprise can help.
When your serve is returned, try to place a soft shot
in the no volley zone. Do not try to overpower your
opponent with a very fast passing shot, unless you are
an advanced player and you feel you can win more
than 80% of points in this manner. Both opponents
are already at net, and it would be a very low
percentage shot. A low soft shot is important because
it gives you time to get to the net and not be on the
defensive. More points are won when returning serve
because the first team that gets to the net usually wins
the point. If you can win 8 out of 10 points with any
other strategy, go for it.
Never Miss Your Serve because you are hitting too
hard, an especially important part of the game. Your
opponents only need a pulse to win the point if you
miss the serve. Give them a chance to lose. Also,
your partner will lose confidence in you if you keep
missing your serve.
After serving, step back one step behind the baseline.
There are two reasons for this. (1) The ball must land
in front of you not at your feet. (2) It will be easier to
see if your opponents return is going to be out. If
your opponent has the ability to hit a drop shot, be
prepared to quickly run forward.
When serving the ball, give yourself leeway, aim for
center of serving box 5 feet from baseline. Serve fast
only if you never miss your serve.
Volley
When volleying, keep elbow out in front of your hip
with paddle head above wrist for better ball control.
Never drop the head of the paddle on low shots. You
must keep skin wrinkles on your wrist at point of
contact.
Try and keep your head and eyes behind ball at ball
height when hitting a volley.
Bend your knees on all low shots. Your back knee
should almost be touching the ground. Stay down all
the way through your shot and keep your head down
and eyes looking at ball contact point long after ball
has been hit.
Do not swing at your volleys unless you are an
advanced player and feel you can make 80% of your
swinging volleys. Punch them unless your opponent
hits a very fast volley or overhead at close range at
you. Then just set the height and angle of your paddle
and block the shot low to your opponent’s feet.
Beginner Pickleball players have a tendency to swing
at their volleys and punch the ground strokes which
should be just the opposite. There is not enough time
to swing at most volleys and you lose your
consistency when you swing and not punch the shot
by extending your arm from the elbow. 
3
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
When you punch your ground strokes, you lose
power and control. Stroke your ground strokes for
better placement and power.
When you are waiting for the ball, you should be in
the "ready position." Your elbows should be out in
front of your body, your feet should be shoulder
width apart, and you should be on your toes. The
head of your paddle should be higher than your wrist.
You should see wrinkles on your wrist. Never drop
the head of your paddle and let those wrinkles
disappear. The angle of the face of the paddle should
be slightly open (1 o’clock to 7 o’clock).
When you strike the ball, you should point your front
shoulder in the direction you want the ball to go and
open or close the face of the paddle to set the angle of
the paddle. Keep a firm wrist and extend your arm
from only the elbow joint, using a jab motion. Setting
the angle of the paddle and the jab motion are two
completely separate motions. First aim the paddle
early. Then jab from the elbow joint.
Keep the butt of the paddle level to the ground all the
way through the jab. (Adjust only the angle of the
face of the paddle).
Always make contact with the ball as far out in front
of your body as you possibly can for more power and
more control of placement.
At the exact point of contact with the ball make a
sound to yourself. This will help prevent you from
making one of the biggest mistakes made while
playing Pickleball, not watching the ball hit the
paddle.
After the point of contact, keep your eyes focused on
the contact point during your follow through.
Return to the ready position quickly after each volley.
The harder you hit your volley the faster you must
return to the ready position.
Never let the face of the paddle of your paddle drop
below your wrist on low volleys. Bend your knees so
that your back knee is almost touching the ground.
Your fist or the butt of the paddle must almost touch
the ground. Keep your head and body down all the
way through the follow through. Stay down; don’t
come up too soon.
If you don’t have time to step to the ball, at least turn
your upper body and point your front shoulder in the
direction you want the ball to go. If you don’t have
time to turn your shoulders, then from the ready
position keep a stationary wrist with paddle parallel
to the net and block the fast shot over the net.
Keep your volley low to your opponent’s feet or
bounce the ball on the court exactly beside him.
Hitting your right handed opponent’s right hip pocket
is not as good as hitting his feet or hitting exactly
beside him, but it is very effective.
After each volley move forward one step toward the
no volley zone. Get as close to NVZ line as possible.
On the back hand volley keep your knuckles lined up
with the paddle face in the direction you want the ball
to go and keep the handle slightly ahead of the
paddle.
You must use an aggressive jab when volleying a ball
with a heavy spin.
The difference between an overhead and a volley the
height at which the ball is when you make contact
with it. If the ball is below the highest point at which
you can reach it with the center of your paddle, you
should use a volley shot. If it is above that point, you
should hit an overhead shot. On too low a shot you
will not be able to fully extend your arm and will
probably put the ball in the net.
When at the net, turn toward your opponent before he
hits the ball. When the ball travels straight toward
your paddle it is easier to hit the ball.

Drop Volley
If your opponent is moving away from the net near
the baseline or your opponent never comes to the net,
these are the times to try drop volleys if you have a
good drop volley.
Most drop volleys are placed near the post on the side
of the court from which your opponent had just
retreated to the baseline to return your team’s lob
shot. If you feel his partner has been anticipating
your drop volley, don’t place your drop volley by the
post, place it half way back from the net and baseline
so that the net person must run away from the net to
play the ball. It is much more difficult to hit a shot 
4
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
when moving quickly away from net than towards
the net. Many times the player who just ran way back
for the lob will recover and get in the way of his
partner trying to help him out
Use a drop volley if your opponent stays at the
baseline.
At the point of contact on a touch shot squeeze your
pinky middle finger and ring finger. This will help
you keep a firm wrist.
Lob
Defensive & Offensive
When making a lob, lob over your opponent’s
backhand side.
If you hit a very high short lob from up close to net
and you are exceptionally fast on your feet, then the
percentages play is to drop back to the baseline and
play your opponent’s overhead. If you are not able to
quickly retreat to the baseline, then hold your
position at the net with your paddle in the ready
position and on your toes. If the ball is hit at your feet
while you are backpedaling and only halfway to the
baseline, it is almost impossible to return. Do not
leave your position at the net unless you are 100%
confident that you can retreat to the baseline with
enough time to prepare for your opponent’s
overhead.
If the ball is lobbed over your head at the net, your
partner should yell "I got it" and run behind you. At
the same time, you should switch sides of the court.
If you feel you can make an excellent overhead, call
off your partner early.
If a ball is hit straight over your head and your
partner isn’t running back to help you, then run back
parallel to the ball so when you get to the ball, you
can hit a deep forehand lob. Do not turn 180 degrees
and run straight back after the ball, because you will
not be in a good position to hit the ball when you get
to it.
Hit a few high lobs before game to evaluate direction
of wind and speed. During every second of an
important game, keep the wind direction in mind. It
will give you points. Steady your game by playing
the wind to your advantage. Beginner and
intermediate players would hit less out balls if they
hit into the wind. Advanced players are better
qualified to play the wind. It can help you and hurt
you.
If the wind is 20mph, it is best to have it at your back.
Overhead
Never hit an overhead shot unless the ball is high
enough. You should hit the ball at the highest point
you can reach on the center of your paddle or you
must take a volley shot.
When hitting an overhead point, point your shoulder
and your finger of your left hand up at ball until just
before you contact ball. Keep your head up until ball
is long gone. Pronate your wrist and paddle just
before you contact ball for a more disguised and
powerful overhead. Hit at opponents’ feet wherever
they are standing.
The difference between an overhead and a volley the
height at which the ball is when you make contact
with it. If the ball is below the highest point at which
you can reach it with the center of your paddle, you
should use a volley shot. If it is above that point, you
should hit an overhead shot. On too low a shot you
will not be able to fully extend your arm and will
probably put the ball in the net.
When the wind is at your back, your timing can be
thrown off and the ball contact is too far out in front
of your body causing the ball to be short and into the
net the way to help this problem is to aim your
overheads just inside the baseline.
Keep in mind while hitting the overhead:
 Use your palm to block the sun.
 Keep your paddle face flat for power.
 Point your finger at the ball. If your finger
moves forward, step forward and vice-versa.
 Do not back pedal. For safety, turn sideways
and side step back to the ball.
 Run back parallel to the flight of the ball; if
the ball is hit straight over your head.
 On a high deep lob, sidestep back past your
anticipated contact point and step forward to
make your overhead. Your weight will be
moving toward the net at the point of contact
so you will have a more steady and powerful
shot.
5
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
Footwork

Never step into the non volley zone with both feet. If
a ball should bounce close to the net in the NVZ,
keep one foot planted outside the NVZ line and lunge
forward like a sword fighter. Tip the ball over the net
into your opponents’ NVZ and quickly recover with
both feet outside your NVZ line. If a player steps into
the NVZ with both feet, it will take twice a long to
get back out. A player cannot touch the ball in the air
when any part of his body is in the NVZ. Good
footwork at the net in this situation can shorten the
time a player is in a vulnerable position.
No matter where you are on the court, always split
step, putting your feet side by side and shoulder
width apart, at the point of your opponent’s contact
with the ball. This allows you to move in either
direction equally well. Do not sacrifice being
balanced and ready for position on the court.
Step toward the post in either direction and cross step
when the ball is hit out of your reach. Do not move
your back foot and lose your position on the court.
Cross stepping makes you a foot taller and gives you
a wider range of coverage.
A side step first combined with a cross step is
sometimes necessary and effective.
Hitting Down Sideline
Do not hit shots down sideline unless:
 Your opponents poach.
 Your team is favored to win.
 Your team has a good lead.
 You have an easy ball to hit.
 You want to keep your opponents honest
when they are close to center court.
 Your opponent’s backhand is to the outside
of the court and he is the weaker player.
A soft ball down the line is just as good, if not better,
and if you can bounce the ball beside your opponent
and be ready to jump on a ball hit 12" above the net.
If you make contact on a shot outside the sideline, try
a shot around the post deep to the baseline corner, or
put up a very high lob to give yourself time to
recover. If you don’t think that you will be able to
recover, try to finish point with pure winner.
If you are stretched out to your limit when volleying,
always go down the line in the direction that you are
stepping. The shot will have more power and be more
consistent. A good example would be the same as in
softball, when a pitcher pitches the ball to the outside
corner of the plate, the right-handed batter has a
better chance of hitting the ball to right field.
Keep your elbows high when hitting the ball down
the sideline.
Follow through a little shorter for a straight volley
down the sideline.
When stretched to your limit to the right, volley
down the right sideline. Go with the pitch.
How to Practice
Find someone of your ability that appreciates the
importance of practicing.
If you want to play your best, you must know the
importance of practice, as well as playing the game.
A player should learn proper footwork to become a
better player. Learn to cross step, side step and split
step. Good footwork makes for easier court coverage,
wider range, and better balance and shots.
You must practice a soft game at the net until you are
so confident that you think that you could do it
perfect for five minutes if needed.
Break the game down into segments.
Ground strokes, corner to corner and down the line.
Volleys: One player at the net and the other at the
baseline. Volley balls hit from different angles. Both
players volley and practice short game.
One player lobs the ball to player at net who hits
overhead shots from different angles. Play points out
using one-half doubles court. Go from corner to
corner, not keeping score without serving and then
with serving. Points should not be counted because a
player tends to try to win by doing only the things
that he does well, rather than practicing things he
doesn’t do well.
6
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
After practicing for a long period of time, play a
singles match using only half of the doubles court
and keeping score. Try to move your opponent
around the court and out of position with ball
placement and the other strategies presented earlier.
After practicing the whole game in segments, the
game becomes an extension of practice and you play
better Pickle Ball.
Poaching
Make sure that your opponents are worried that you
may poach. You are not doing the job if you are not
giving head and shoulder fakes at the net.
Occasionally poach just to make your fakes seem
believable.
Make your opponent hit the ball to you. Make a head
and shoulder fake in one direction and hold your
position on the court. Your opponent will think that
you are going to move down the net and he will hit
the ball to you. Occasionally you will have to poach
to make your fakes believable.
If both players on the opposing team are much better
than one of the players on the other team than the
stronger player of that team must poach and fake like
he is about to poach to level the playing field. Only if
you are playing to win, not playing for fun and the
opposing team is hitting all their balls to your partner.
An excellent poacher should poach as much as
possible even if all four are of equal ability His
partner should not take this as a personal affront. It is
proper play and good strategy. To poach is to cut off
and hit the shot that your opponent hit to your
partner.
Types of Poaching:
 Waiting at the net until you actually see an
easy return from your opponent and move
across court to cut the shot off for a winner.
 Player anticipates an easy return from his
opponent and moves across the court to cut
the shot off a split second before his
opponent hits the ball.
 It is important to pick the proper time in the
game to poach.
 Early in the game so that your team has time
to recover in case you lose the point.
 When your team is way ahead or way
behind.
 When you or your partner has just hit a very
difficult shot at you opponents feet and you
feel the opponent will be lucky just to return
the ball without being accurate.
Reduce Unforced Errors
The safest place on the court to bounce the ball is
soft, low and in the middle of the no volley zone.
With this placement, your opponent may hesitate,
thinking that his partner will hit the ball. Hit the ball
soft so your opponents will have no pace to work
with. This is the highest percentage shot.
When at the net be patient. Keep hitting the ball soft
back into the no volley zone until your opponents
make the mistake of hitting the ball too high. Do not
go for the kill unless the ball is at least 12" above the
net. Eighty-Five percent of your shots should be
volleys standing within 12 inches of the no volley
zone. Do not try a tough angle shot until you have
drawn your opponents out of position. Keep blasting
the high balls at your opponents’ feet until they miss
it. Never try an angle shot or difficult shot when the
ball is below the net. Be defensive. Try a lob when
your opponent least expects. It is also a very effective
shot.
Be prepared early. If you hit a fast volley to your
opponent, you must prepare your paddle face for the
next shot faster. The faster you hit, the faster you
must prepare.
Be patient and wait for a ball that is 12" or higher
over the net before trying to hit a winner. Always go
for your opponents’ feet, no matter where they are on
the court. Foot shots are much safer than angle shots.
Only try angle shots if you get a sitter and feel that
you are 150% sure that you won’t make an unforced
error. A sitter is an easy shot.
If you are playing properly, eighty-five percent of all
your shots and your partner’s shots should be volleys
no further back than 12" from the no volley zone.
Ground strokes are only used when returning a serve,
hitting the return of your serve, or if opponent lobs
and pulls you away from the no volley zone line. Get
back to NVZ line as fast as you possibly can.
7
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
Hitting down the middle is a high percentage shot
and is much safer than a wide angle shot.
Always allow for error never aim for the line itself.
One of the most common mistakes players makes is
swinging at their volleys and punching their ground
strokes. It should be the other way around.
If you cannot make a specific shot at least eight out
of ten times, do not try this shot in a game until in
practice you can make it consistently. Four out of ten
tries is just enough to lose the game. Shot selection at
key times in the game is very important. Know the
shots that you are very consistent with and use them
at key times in the game. Give your opponents a
chance to lose. Don’t beat them to it.
There is a time to try and hit a “Pure Winner”, a time
to hit a “¾ Winner”, and time to just keep the ball
alive by blocking it back to your opponent.
1. Pure Winner – (as hard as you can hit the ball).
a. When your partner is weaker than both of your
opponents and you get a high ball. You must take
advantage of your good opportunities.
b. When you are the favorite team.
c. When you have a decent lead in the game.
d. When playing good competition; you make hay
when the sun shines because you don’t get many
good opportunities to go for it.
2. ¾ Winner – (3/4 pace shot).
a. When you are in control of point at the net and
both opponents are at baseline and are very steady
players.
b. When a ball hit to you is not a high percentage
shot.
c. When you feel your team is steadier and better than
your opponents.
d. When your position on the court is not very good.
3. Just keep the ball alive by blocking the shot to
opponent’s feet.
a. When an exceptionally fast ball is hit to you be
defensive by blocking it back rather than swing at it.
Be Careful: A less difficult shot to hit may
sometimes cause a player to miss a shot because it
looked so easy that he thought it was impossible to
miss. A player tends to over hit and not concentrate
as much as when hitting a difficult shot and misses it.
When it is very windy make shorter steps and keep
adjusting your feet because the ball keeps moving
around. Watch the ball closer than normal and make
most of your shots down the middle of court.
If you feel you can hit with extreme power all the
time and still not sacrifice placement and consistency
then you have to decide whether you are a great
Pickleball player or kidding yourself. If you decide
on the latter, take a little pace off your shots.
When warming up before your Pickleball game hit a
couple of high lobs to check out the wind direction
and speed so you don’t lose a few point s during the
game. Try not to look into the sun if possible. The
sun can cause an error.
Errors:
 Poor Footwork
 No Follow Thru
 Impatience – don’t work the point.
 Predictability
Know Your Opponents

1. Do they try and hit every ball hit to them, even
balls that would have gone out? If so, hit much faster
at them then you normally would. You have nothing
to lose.
2. Does your opponent stay at the baseline and not
move forward to the net?
3. Does your opponent hit all there volleys on the
same side of their paddle. If so, they are vulnerable if
you hit low to the backhand.
4. Does your opponent handle fast balls well? If so,
hit soft balls to them and vice versa.
5. Does your opponent have trouble returning under
spin balls?
6. Does your opponent like to poach? Be ready to hit
behind him.
7. If you do not know your opponent then keep the
ball as low as possible and on the backhand side until
you have a chance to make a book on him.
8
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
8. Which one of your opponents is the weaker
player? A team is only as strong as its weakest player
and the weakest player is only as strong as his
weakest shot.
9. How fast are your opponents, then you will know
whether to drop or lob.

Mental Errors
1. Improper shot selection
2. Hitting balls going out of bounds
3. Over hitting
4. Not enough patience
5. Not keeping track of wind
6. Not having a mental book on your opponents
assets and deficits
7. Not communicating properly with your partner
8. Too predictable.
Mental errors are much easier to cure than technical
errors when hitting the ball.

Hitting Fast Balls

Only hit the ball as fast as it takes to win the point.
Start the match hitting at an average speed and keep
adding a little pace until you are winning more points
then you are losing. Every opponent is different. The
faster you hit the ball the less precise your placement.
If you can win more than 50% of your points blasting
every ball, then go for it!
Be prepared for a faster bounce of the ball if the ball
seems like it might hit the painted lines on the court.

Anticipate Out Balls
Try to anticipate when your opponents are about to
hit an out of bound balls. Know when to expect an
out of bounds ball before your opponents even touch
the ball.
Things to take into consideration when anticipating
an out ball from your opponent.
1 .Is the wind at your opponent’s back?
2. Is your opponent swinging real fast at the ball and
is his contact point below net?
3. Is your opponent making a difficult shot on the full
gallop?
4. Is he a very inconsistent player?
5. Is it a very hard and low percentage shot for you to
try and return? If so let it go. It may go out.
Keep an ear open for yell of "no" from your partner
when he thinks the ball is out.
Hitting your opponents out balls builds confidence in
your opponents and a good player will make an
adjustment after realizing he has just hit an out ball.
You will probably lose future points without him
being penalized for hitting an out ball.
If you should play someone who always tries to hit
everything, even your out balls then hit at that person
much faster than you normally would. You have
nothing to lose.
Be aware of where you are on the court at all times.
This will help you to decide whether to hit or not to
hit a ball.
If you stop hitting your opponents out balls your
percentage of wins will rise immediately.
Play the Wind
Which direction should you hit toward with the wind
or against the wind is a personal thing. There is no
right or wrong, it is a personal thing.
Types of Wind:
1. A steady wind in your face is excellent for a
person who likes to lob.
2. A heavy wind in your face is not good for
lobbing and would be an advantage to a
person with a great overhead because the
ball tends to stop rather than go over their
heads and drop in the court.
3. A heavy wind at your back is an advantage
to a hard hitter because it could ad 15-
20mph to their stroke making it much harder
to react.
4. If the wind is coming across the court either
way, you must stay away from the side of
the court that the wind is blowing toward
and have the wind on your mind at all times.
5. If winds are gusty, the player must be
constantly feeling the wind and play it
properly.
6. Try and convince yourself the wind is
bothering your opponent as much as it is
bothering you.
7. The team that plays the wind the best will
usually win.
9
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
Pickleball Techniques

Ground Stroke Stances
A backhand ground stroke can be hit from an open or
a closed stance.
The Closed-stance is used most often. The player
runs to a spot where the ball will be as close to waist
high as possible and sets both his feet shoulder width
apart and parallel to the net. He then steps toward the
ball with his front foot and hits the ball. The Openstance is used when you have a very fast ball hit to
you and very little time to move your feet. You have
only enough time to set your feet side by side at
about a 45 to 180 degree angle to the net and turn
your upper body at the waist so that your front
shoulder is pointing at your target area.
Right handed player hitting a forehand would point
his left shoulder toward his target and when hitting
his backhand would point his right shoulder toward
his target and follow through towards target.

Serving Techniques
1. Use a bowling motion.
2. Point your paddle toward the ground with
bent knees.
3. Toss the ball in front of your body in the
direction of target. Your target should be the
very center of the serving box. This will
give you a lot of leeway for error. Never
Ever miss your serve because it probably
will be the difference in a close game.
4. Step toward the target with your front
shoulder pointing at your target.
5. Swing in an upward motion with the paddle
below the wrist and watch the ball contact
your paddle below the waist.
6. Make a soft sound to yourself at the point of
contact with the ball to prevent you from
lifting your head before contact.
7. Follow through in the direction of your
target.
8. Step back on foot behind the baseline after
serving to assure the return of serve will
land in front of you. If you step into the
court after serving the ball it could land at
your feet or behind you and you will have to
make a difficult shot because you had to
backpedal to make a shot.


Forehand Groundstroke
Right Handed Players:
1. Ready your paddle back into position to stroke the
ball with your left hand. The paddle grip should be a
continental grip with the butt end of the handle
pointing towards the oncoming ball and the paddle is
level.
2. Step toward the ball with your left foot and make
contact with the ball opposite the spot that your
planted your foot. Point your left shoulder at your
target.
3. Keep your left hand out in front of your body with
your palm facing the ground at the same hight as
your paddle and this will help keep you balanced.
4. Watch the ball make contact on you paddle and
make sound to yourself at the exact moment the ball
touches your paddle. This will help you watch the
ball more consistently.
5. Keep a firm wrist and pretend you are hitting four
balls lined up in a row during your follow through.
Follow through in the direction of your target.
6. When hitting a low forehand shot bend your knees
with your right knee as close to the ground as
possible that stay down all the way through the shot.
7. Quickly return to your ready position.
Backhand Groundstroke
Right Handed Players:
1. Run to a spot where the ball will be waist high or
as close to waist high as possible in your ready
position.
2. Set your feet in a closed stance position (side by
side) pointing your right shoulder and looking over
your right shoulder toward your target then step with
your front foot toward your target.
3. Bend your knees on low balls and keep your head
and body down all through the shot and follow thru.
4. Point the butt end of your handle like a gun at the
ball.
5. Paddle face should be perpendicular to ground.
6. Contact point should be out in front of the spot you
plant your front foot.
7. Keep a firm wrist at contact and you will be more
consistent. (do not roll your wrist at contact unless
you are an advanced player)
8. Watch the ball hit your paddle.(making a sound to
yourself at exactly the point of contact of ball on your
paddle will help)
9. Make a long follow through in the direction of
your target. Pretend you are hitting four balls in a row
will help.
10. Quickly after your full follow thru get back to
your ready position for the next shot.
10
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”

Overhead Technique
1. Grip – Continental Grip (same as all other
strokes).
2. Turn your body so that your shoulders and body
are parallel to the flight of the lobed ball.
3. Keep your feet parallel and move them forward
and back until the ball in the air is a little more in
front of your body and as high in the air as the center
of your paddle can reach.
4. Point your left hand at the ball while readying
your paddle. About ear height and making sure
paddle face is completely flat at the point of contact
for extra power.
5. Keep head and chin up and watch the spot that
the ball contacts the paddle long after your follow
through.
6. A split second before contacting the ball, pronate
your wrist to disguise your shot and the paddle will
contact the ball flat and this will get more power on
the overhead.
7. After setting the paddle, the overhead is all wrist.
Just step towards your target, point your left shoulder
towards the target and snap your wrist with same
motion as you would snap a whip. Pretend you are
throwing the paddle at the ball.
8. If you don’t have time to move your feet at least
turn your shoulders and waist for more power and
placement.
9. If you have to jump in the air to hit the overhead
use the scissors kick method. If you live in The
Villages in Florida, find “Mo” and ask him. It is too
hard to explain, it must be demonstrated and you
must be able to leave the ground with both feet.

Drop Volley Technique
1. Use Continental Grip with the bottom two fingers
tight and the top three fingers a light grip.
2. Paddle motion is from high to low (half moon,)
paddle face finishes parallel to the ground.
3. Elbow and knee are bent.
4. Short backswing.
5. Punch the ball (which is full extension at elbow
joint).
6. Meet the ball early and out in front of the body.
7. Do not drop the paddle head below your wrist. If
paddle face is locked firm above your wrist then skin
wrinkles can be seen on your wrist.
8. Slide your paddle under the ball (like turning a key
in a door) to put an underspin on the ball. The ball
will bounce low when it drops over the net.
9. Keep your head down and eyes glued to the spot
that you made contact with the ball for as long as
possible.
10. Paddle head should follow through in the
direction you want the ball to go.
11. Tip – Make a sound to yourself at exactly the
time the ball makes contact with your paddle. Not too
soon or too late. This will make sure you are
watching the ball hit the paddle.
Additional Information

Extra Strategies
1. When you are learning to play pickleball, never
avoid hitting your backhand ground strokes or
volleys. If you avoid hitting your backhand you will
never master the stroke.
2. When playing during a windy day keep track of the
wind speed and direction constantly because it does
change at times. If you play the wind properly then it
will build confidence in yourself, in that, the wind is
bothering your opponent more than yourself.
3. When you are feeling a little tight during a match,
don't hit tentatively or too slow. Hit at your normal
steady pace, but give yourself more leeway to hit
your target until your confidence returns.
4. Make a mental book on your own attributes and
deficits. Only hit shots that you feel are a high
percentage for your own ability. Know what shots
you can make more than 50% of the time. Do what
you do well and practice the things that you don't do
well then use them when you can make them 50% of
the time.
5. Bounce up onto the balls of your feet, in the ready
position, at the point of contact of the ball on your
opponents paddle. A moving body reacts quicker
than a stationary body.
6. If both backhands of your opponents are at the
middle of the court, hit down the middle of the court.
7. If your shot makes your opponent take two steps or
more your chance for winning the point increases
immensely.
8. Don't back up to play a dink off the bounce, when
you can hit the ball in the air. Always try and hit the
ball with your weight going towards the net.
9. Make contact with the ball at the highest possible
point in the air when volleying and waist high on the
bounce for your ground stroke. It will be a higher
percentage shot and open up more angles with less
chance of putting balls into the net.
10. Give your opponents a lot of chances to miss and
they will not let you down.
11. It is not how hard you hit the ball, but where.
11
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
12. Expect to win – Refuse to lose.
Play Steady: The team with the most unforced errors
loses. Not the team with the fewest winners.
Placement is more important than power.
Keep the ball as low as possible for every hit, unless
you must make a defensive lob.
Place the ball at the opponent’s feet or bounce the
ball right beside your opponent. He must hit the ball
up, which quickly puts him on the defensive and you
on the offensive. The team which must hit the ball up
most of the time will lose. Keep the ball at your
opponent’s feet no matter where he is on the court.
Only hit the ball as hard as you can control the
placement. Do not sacrifice placement for power. Hit
¾ winners unless you get a put away shot for a full
power winner.
When an opponent is planted at the net and you can’t
make a shot at his feet, the next best place to hit it is
at the right hip pocket of a right-handed player. This
is a very difficult shot to return.
Patience is a virtue in Pickleball
Do not try to win the point from the baseline. Just hit
the ball softly and bounce the ball in the no volley
zone and follow it to net.
Pick a good time to move forward, not when your
opponent has an easy shot. Every second that you are
playing, your goal should be to get to the net on a
minimum of one step forward and split step at every
touch of the ball by your opponent. Split step is when
both feet are side by side and shoulder width apart.
The team that plays from the baseline exposes their
feet to their opponents and will lose to a team as good
as or better than they are.
If your partner is drawn out of the court on his side,
you must move over to protect his area until he can
get back into the court. If you think that you are
playing an intelligent opponent, then give a head and
shoulder fake, giving the impression that you are
moving to cover for your partner. Don’t move from
your position, however, and your opponent will
probably put the ball on your paddle.
If you feel an opponent is anticipating your shot by
watching the face of your paddle and moving before
you make contact, then have your paddle face straight
ahead and then at the last second, go cross court
before your opponent has time to react. Do not have
your paddle "read" cross court then try and surprise
your opponent and go down line because paddle must
be brought back first and the extra time it takes gives
your opponent more time to react to your fake.
If you are playing a former racquet ball player (who
very quickly flicks his paddle at the ball), you must
prepare your ready position even earlier or you will
be late punching your volleys or ground strokes.
Give your partner a second opinion on whether a ball
is in or out. Do it early enough to give him time to
back away from it.
Every once in a while, change the spin and speed of
all your shots. The element of surprise will pay
dividends.
Sometimes the best shot is no shot at all. When
playing with a much better partner than yourself, let
your partner take as many shots as he possible can,
especially if he yells, "I have it." Chances are good
you are probably going to get the lion’s share of all
the hits anyway. So the more your partner touches the
ball, the better chance you will win.
There should be only positive communication
between you and your partner. "Good try" "I have it"
"Switch" "Yours" and "Bounce it" are as examples.
Never say anything negative to your partner if he
isn’t doing well because it will just make things
worse. It shows you are not a confident player, and
you are looking for an excuse to lose.
The second to last shot before the end of a point by
you or your partner usually decides if your team
either wins or loses the point. If you do not keep your
shot low enough or placed well enough and your
opponent slams a shot at your partner and he misses,
the shot, then the point was lost by you. Sometimes
the point could have been lost by the third or fourth
to last shot because the team never could recover
from being put on the defensive earlier in the point.
Keep a book in your mind about the people that you
play regularly. Know what they are good at and also
know their weaknesses. Many players always make
certain shots in particular situations, and if you can
anticipate these shots, you will have an edge. For 
12
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
example, some players, when running in for a ball
that bounces near the post in the no volley zone,
always try a cross court topspin shot to the other post.
When your team is a heavy favorite, play a whole
game without being interested about winning and
concentrate on just placing every single ball at your
opponent’s feet or beside them. Practice not going for
winners and being patient. No matter where your
opponents are on the court, go for their feet. It is a
safe shot, and it will steady your game and pay
dividends.
On a cross court volley make contact a little farther
out in front of you.
All strokes taken with your Pickleball paddle are
technically the same as all the tennis strokes with one
exception, the serve. The only differences between
the two are the feel of the ball on the paddle and the
distance from your hand to the contact point of the
ball on the paddle. .A person wanting to improve his
Pickleball strokes should read tennis books and
magazines and become a student of the game.
Determine if your opponents are left-handed before
the start of the game so that you won’t be hitting to
their strength.
Before starting each game, let your partner know that
you don’t mind his overruling any call you make as
long as he is 100% sure you were wrong. If one
person on a team feels a ball was in and the other
doesn’t, then the point goes to the other team. If your
feelings about the score or whether the ball is in or
out are different from the other three players on the
court, then right or wrong, you should concede.
Never yell anything that may help your opponent.
Think of the shot that you just hit that was wrong.
Don’t yell because your opponent may hit your out
ball if you do not bring his attention to that
possibility that it may go out.
Learn all the proper tennis stroking techniques to
help improve your pickle ball game.
If two players with the same natural ability play
pickle ball any and one uses the proper tennis
technique, that player will be a steadier and better
player.
If both players are self taught players then the one
with the most athletic sense and ability will be the
better player. Learn proper technique. It will give you
an edge over your opponent.
A player should try not to have any bad out bursts
after missing their shots. This type of reaction builds
confidence in your opponents. Your partner will also
lose confidence in you.
When two right hand players are playing together, the
player facing the net on the left, who has his forehand
to the middle of the court, takes the balls on his side
of the court plus about 8 to 12 inches toward the
center line.
When two left hand players are playing together, the
player with his forehand toward the center of the
court should take any ball on his side of the court
plus any ball 8 to 12 inches to the left of center court.
When a right handed and a left handed player are
playing together and both players backhands are to
the middle of the court, the player facing the net on
the on the left side should be considered the fore
hand and cover his side plus 8 to 12 inches to the
right of center court unless both players agree the
other player has the stronger backhand.
If you like to hit with power and if your opponents
cannot recognize when a ball is going out and they
hit every ball that they can get their paddles on, then
it is to your advantage to have the heavy wind at your
back.
When your opponents stop hitting you the ball
intentionally every time you play, it means your
partners are very weak or you have become a very
good player. Feel good about it.
There is no right or wrong way to play Pickleball.
You should do things that work for you. Some
advanced players have their unconventional ways of
playing Pickleball and because they have exceptional
athletic ability, they are successful more than 50% of
the time. Beginners with average ability would be
more successful if they used conventional tennis
strokes and strategy before they pick up bad habits
and are not able to change.
A player should not be one dimensional; they should
try to develop a complete game of hitting with
placement as well as power. Develop a good lob and
drop volley as well a good soft game. A player will
not be predictable if he is able to have a variety in his
Pickleball game.
13
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
If your partner is a much weaker player than you are
and your opponents are hitting as many balls as
possible to him, then a soft dink into the no volley
zone is not to your advantage because it gives your
opponent more time to hit another ball to your
partner.
After hitting the ball toward your opponent follow
the same line that the ball is traveling when
advancing toward the no volley line. This will give
you a good angle and position for your opponents
return shot.
If your team should hit the ball close to the
opponent’s right sideline and the ball will be a volley
or ground stroke then you and your partner should
divide the court into 3 equal thirds when you are
waiting at the NVZ line for the return. The player on
the right side of the court protects his sideline and the
right 1/3 of the court. The other player protects the
middle third of the court and you leave the far left
third of the court open. A crosscourt shot is a low
percentage, it’s a sharp angle and the ball must have a
lot of top spin. Most players cannot make this shot
consistently so protect down the line and you will
win much more points than you lose.
The better you get at Pickleball the less balls will be
hit to you so it becomes harder to win. The thing to
do to try and get your opponents to hit more balls to
you only if your partner is weaker than your
opponents and is interested in winning:
A. Fake like you are going to poach but hold
your spot and they will hit you the ball by
mistake.
B. Really poach occasionally to get into the
point but tell your partner before you do so
he or she will be ready to switch sides and
coer for you. This will make your fakes
more believable.
C. When you get a ball you must make hay
when the sun shines and hit with a little
more pace than you normally do and hope
for the best.





Guide In-Review
1: Be in ready position early! Stopped with feet
parallel to each other at the point of contact of ball on
your opponents paddle.
2: Placement is more important than power. Hit at
your opponents feet or bounce the ball beside them.
Do not sacrifice placement for power.
3: Hit to your opponents’ weakest players weakest
shot.
4: Play steady - Do not over hit or make unforced
errors. Never miss your serve or return of serve. Have
patience.
5: Try and anticipate your opponents out balls.
6: Punch your volleys and swing at your ground
strokes.
7: When hitting a ball step toward your target. Point
your front shoulder towards your target, follow
through towards your target, and watch closely at the
point of contact of the ball on your paddle.
8: 80% of all your hits should be volleys at the NVZ
line if you are playing to win.

Definitions

Ground Stroke - A ball that is hit after it bounces.
Volley - A ball that is hit before it touches the
ground.
Lob - A ball that is hit over your opponents head and
bounces inside the baseline.
Unforced Error - When a player misses a shot that is
not very difficult.
No Volley Zone - (NVZ or Kitchen) - The area of the
court between the net and the front line of the serving
boxes.
Backhand - When hitting the ball on your left side of
your body for right handed players and the opposite
for left hand players.
Forehand - When hitting the ball on your right side of
your body for right handed players and the opposite
for left hand players.
3/4 Winner - Not hitting a shot the fastest that you are
capable of hitting so you will not sacrifice placement
for power.
Split Step - When both feet are parallel to each other
and ready to cross in either direction.
14
PickleballCoach.com – Pickleball Strategy Guide by Coach “Mo”
Cross Step - From a split step position moving your
right foot toward the left post or left foot toward the
right post without moving your other foot at all.
Pure Winner - When your opponent never even
touches your shot.
Top Spin - When a player makes the ball spin away
from him low to high, the ball tends to drop because
the contact of paddle of the ball is up and over the
ball.
Underpin - A player makes the ball spin toward his
body high to low; the ball tends to rise because the
contact point of paddle is high to low.
Overhead - A ball hit at center of paddle from a point
as high as you can reach over your head.
Drop Volley - A soft hit ball that is placed just over
the net with an under spin on the ball so it won't
bounce high.
Poach - When a player cuts in front of his partner to
take his shot.
Continental Grip - When the point of the V between
your thumb and index finger is placed at the middle
of the top of the handle when your paddle is
perpendicular to the ground.

Conclusion
Have Fun! It is only a game.
Richard Movsessian is a former USTA 4.5 ranked
doubles player and tennis teaching professional. He is
a certified member of the United States Professional
Tennis Association. He was a Boys Varsity Tennis
Coach and a Tennis Teaching Pro for 30 years. He
now resides in The Villages in Florida where he loves
playing, learning and teaching others about
Pickleball.
Notice: The reader is free to share this guide with
fellow Pickleball players. Any part of this content
may not be used on any personal or commercial
website without the express written consent of
Richard Movsessian. This Pickleball Strategy Guide
is protected under certain copyright laws and
therefore may not be copied, sold or distributed
without permission.
To learn more about this Pickleball Strategy Guide,
please visit PickleballCoach.com.
© 2006-2009 Richard Movsessian
Notes
 